32  Part One  Organizations, Management, and the Networked Enterprise

text commentary complement the TryTracker data. The keys to the game 
are determined ahead of a specific contest by analyzing a historical database 
of past matchups between a pair. For example, in 2015 England’s key was 
to average at least 3.2 meters per carry in the forwards; attempt an offload 
from 10 percent of opposition tackles; and make more than 66 percent of total 
line-breaks in the match. Fans can use their mobile devices to keep track of 
how their favorite team is faring, concentrating on game elements that will 
increase its winning chances. Key players for each team are selected after the 
game by comparing a single score compiled using different criteria for each 
position. Goal scoring is currently excluded so as not to overvalue kickers and 
undervalue players who contribute to creating scoring opportunities. 
Like the IBM SlamTracker used at the Grand Slam tennis tournaments, 
the goal of TryTracker is to provide data visualization and real-time statis-
tics to draw in fans. To compete with more popular sports such as Premier 
League football, the RFU hopes that enhanced communication will increase 
fan engagement. In 2015, IBM TryTracker was an ever-present fixture of Eng-
landRugby.com’s extensive match coverage. As their understanding of game 
mechanics and emotional investment in what their team needs to do in order 
to prevail grows, casual fans will become dedicated fans who return again 
and again. Beyond marketing strategy, the long-term potential of predictive 
analysis is that it may provide tactical insights to players and coaches that will 
improve match play and thus the overall product offered to fans. 
In 2016 IBM has deployed the same predictive analytics technology to the 
Australian New South Wales Waratahs Rugby team with an emphasis on pre-
dicting player injuries based on their general health, and performance data on 
the field generated from GPS sensors that players wear. 

Sources: IBM, “Building  a Solid Foundation for Big Data Analytics,” IBM Systems Thought 
 
Leadership Paper, 2016; IBM, “IBM Predictive Analytics Reduces Player Injury and Opti-
mises Team Performance for NSW Waratahs Rugby Team,” IBM.com, accessed November 
14, 2016; IBM, “3 Ways Big Data and Analytics Will Change Sports,” by Preetam Kumar, IBM 
Analytics, ibmbigdatahub.com, December 17, 2015; Simon Creasey, “Rugby Football Union 
Uses IBM Predictive Analytics For Six Nations,” ComputerWeekly.com, 2016; “About Us,” 
rfu.com, accessed December, 14, 2015; “TryTracker: Rugby Data Analysis,”  Telegraph, 
November 19, 2015; Oliver Pickup, “How Does TryTracker Work,”  Telegraph, November 19, 
2015; Simon Creasey, “Rugby Football Union Uses IBM Predictive Analytics for Six Nations,” 
ComputerWeek, September 2015; “IBM Rugby Insight Summer 2015,” MSN.com/sports, Sep-
tember 3, 2015; “Live England vs. Scotland with IBM TryTracker,”  www.englandrugby.
com, March 15, 2015; “IBM TryTracker Confirms Performance,” www.englandrugby.com/
ibmtrytracker/, November 29, 2014; IBM UK, “IBM TryTracker Rugby Insight: QBE Interna-
tionals 2014 England vs. Australia,” IBM Rugby Insight, November 27, 2014; Oliver Pickup, 
“IBM TryTracker: How Does It Work?” Telegraph, October 31, 2013.  

T he challenges facing the RFU demonstrate why information systems are so 
essential today. The RFU is classified as a “Friendly Society,” somewhere 
between a true company and a charity. It receives both government support 
and corporate sponsorship money. But it must maximize revenues from ticket 
sales, hospitality and catering, television rights, and its travel company in order 
to support both grassroots and elite rugby in England.